Hi, Herman. Hi, Judene. Welcome to our subcommittee.
Thank you for joining us. You've got 10 minutes,
and we'd love to have a minute or two to ask questions towards the end of your
time.
Over to you.
Brilliant. Thank you. So kia ora koutou. My name's Herman Visser-Edj.
I'm the General Manager of the Governance Leadership Center here at the IoD,
and I'm joined by Judene Edgar, who is a Principal Governance Leadership
Advisor on my team.
Very grateful for the committee for hearing from us today.
I guess, in short, we support the intent of the bill and the objective of
improving transparency and reducing modern slavery
risks. But our submission focuses on ensuring the regime is
proportionate, workable, and capable of driving meaningful
governance and supply chain improvement rather than just additional
compliance burden.
So, good morning, everyone. Thank you for this opportunity.
So the bill should provide greater clarity
around whether it is intended to operate as a disclosure
regime or evolve into a more substantive
mandatory due diligence regime. Because as it's currently
drafted, the definition of due diligence extends well
beyond reporting and creates ongoing
expectations around systems, controls,
monitoring, supplier engagement, and remediation
activities. And so if the intent is a due
diligence regime, then implementation settings
need to recognize that capability maturity
develops progressively over time like we've seen in all
other disclosure regimes, particularly for
organizations with quite large and complex domestic and
international supply chains. We've heard from companies who've got
thousands of different
organizations within their supply chains.
So we support a staged and proportionate implementation
settings and transitional arrangements that support a
more progressive capability build over
multiple reporting cycles.
And so we,
of course, to enable that effective implementation and meeting
those due diligent requirements,
really clear ongoing guidance from the registrar,
including training and practical support, is going to be quite critical.
And we support a regime focused on that continuous
improvement and capability uplift, particularly in those
initial cycles rather than that expectation
of immediate maturity. And the same applies
to when we look at any penalties, is it needs to
focus on that maturity. Another area is the reporting
periods should align with entities' existing financial years
to reduce unnecessary duplication and support more practical
governance assurance and reporting processes, particularly for trans-Tasman
and multinational organizations.
And you'll see that that's in the Australian Modern Slavery Act.
And similarly, also in their act is the ability to have joint or
group statements and recognize overseas modern
slavery statements where they substantially meet
New Zealand requirements, and that would also reduce duplication and
compliance burden while still providing that meaningful transparency
and governance oversight.
Thanks, Judene. So I guess putting on a director hat, our principal
concern is around where the primary liability provision
sits. And we believe the primary liability provision should sit with
the reporting entity, not necessarily board members.
Boards are inherently responsible for oversight, challenge, and
assurance of compliance rather than operational delivery of
compliance.
The bill creates personal liability where a director could reasonably be
expected to have known of non-compliance and failed to take reasonable
steps to prevent or stop it.
In our view, this is a significant liability threshold in a
regime that relies heavily on management systems, supplier
engagement, supplier information, and judgment-based
assessments. And I guess our experience in this space says that
these types of standards, particularly where they're as yet
untested, can lead to great uncertainty and
over-compliance, which we think is unhelpful for the system at large.
If the committee believes that personal liability should be retained, we
believe that it should be confined to conduct that is clearly personal
in terms of that individual director and clearly wrongful, such as
knowingly providing false information or intentional
non-compliance with requirements rather than a sort of
reasonableness standard.
Our final point is that we believe that the cumulative effect of
the liability enforcement and procurement settings
could be disproportionate and create
unintended commercial and governance consequences.
The public register, publication of breaches, pecuniary penalties,
and procurement consequences interact in a way that sort of
magnifies the impact and has a, we think,
materially enhanced
impact beyond each of the individual sections
themselves.
The regime should encourage transparency and continuous improvement,
as Judene said, but we fear that the current settings may risk
defensive reporting behavior,
which basically encourages
hiding of information and discourages open
reporting of capability gaps and areas requiring
further improvement. And as Judene has said, our focus should be
on continuous improvement and an iterative implementation of the regime.
So just in closing, we do support the intent of this bill,
and like you, we want to see a regime that improves
transparency, strengthens governance oversight, and drives
meaningful uplift in modern slavery risk management.
And so for us, those key themes, as Herman has said, are around ensuring
liability sits primarily with the reporting entity, supporting a
staged and capability-focused implementation approach,
improving some of those areas of Trans-Tasman alignment
while avoiding unnecessary compliance burdens and competitiveness
impacts for New Zealand businesses.
We also encourage careful calibration of the broader liability,
enforcement, and procurement settings so it
supports that transparency that we're all seeking.
So thank you for your time, and we are open for any
of your questions. Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you. Members, any questions? Greg?
Yeah. Thank you, Judene and Herman, very much to a substantial
and very thoughtful submission. Just pressing a little bit more into the
director's liability, I hear
clearly
your doubts about it, and have been shared by earlier submitters.
I guess the challenge that as legislators we face
is trying to get the balance right around the fact that
there are clearly directors who don't see
value in this kind of work.
And the idea of
placing
some form of liability on the directors personally is
to
heighten
their engagement
with the framework.
And we've seen this in
other areas of law, both for and against, in terms of the effect of having
director liability. So I'm not
deaf to those concerns and the challenges that can place on businesses
in finding people who want to serve as directors.
But just appreciate your reflections, a few more reflections on
how seriously companies or particularly boards will take this
in the absence of them being,
upholding that liability, at least at some kind of personal
level. Because what we've tried to do in draft the legislation is set the bar
quite high. But I hear what you're saying is that, are you saying that the
bar is not high enough or that you don't want the bar there at all?
Look, I
think we are saying in the first instance we think the liability should be
on the entity first. And the reason for that is, directors have a primary
obligation to ensure an organization is compliant.
Mm-hmm.
That is a core part of their Company Act duties and
is part of our kind of good governance standard and expectation.
Where companies have material compliance obligations, that does
focus the organization on it, and it does focus the board on it, and we don't
think you need individual board director liability to do
that. To be honest, if it's an obligation, even if the directors believe in
it, the company has to do it. So I think that can be a bit of a red herring.
The issue we have is that as soon as you attach individual
liability, and often also individual liability framed
around reasonableness or some sort of
unintentional perhaps wrongdoing-
Mm
... you create a real reticence and
a very high risk of over-compliance and reliance on
assurance and all sorts of things which can be costly but also actually can
maybe not exist or, as Judene has pointed out, may not be possible in
a system where you're reliant on a whole bunch of other people in your supply
chain.
So we believe that,
I think there will be adequate focus even if it's not on the individual.
And if you really must have individual liability, that
should be intentional wrongdoing based.
So it should be intentional non-compliance or intentionally withholding or
providing false information rather than a reasonableness standards, because we have
seen in a lot of legislation that as soon as these concepts of
reasonableness come out, it creates a whole lot of uncertainty, which
almost always defaults to over-compliance.
Yeah. No, I hear that. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much. Grant, sorry, we've run out of time.
We'll keep moving. Thank you, Judene and Herman.
Appreciate you making a submission today.
Thank you, Committee.
Thank you.
Appreciate it.
Okay, next up is Gwyn Chant.
Hi, Gwyn. Welcome to the subcommittee on the Modern Slavery Bill.
You've got five minutes, and we'd love to be able to have a minute or so to ask you
a question within that.
Good morning. Hi, my name is Gwyn Chant.
Thank you to you, and thank you to the committee for the opportunity to
speak today.
In my written submission, I made two recommendations to the Modern Slavery Bill:
lower the reporting threshold to $20 million and require due
diligence to prevent and remediate incidents of slavery.
Jafar Qurehi,
Joseph Matamada,
Tarun Gautam,
these are the names of some of the men who exploited, harmed,
and caused untold ongoing suffering to their fellow human
beings who trusted them right here in New Zealand.
It's likely, though, that these labor hire contractors would fall below the
$20 million threshold
and, under this new legislation, would not face accountability
beyond what's already in place through the law.
Jafar Qurehi was already prosecuted in 2017,
then again in 2024.
After he's seen out this sentence and paid his fines,
what is stopping him from repeating the same
pattern?Clearly not the law as it currently
stands.
So while the lower threshold will reach more of the exploitation in the supply
chains, I do believe due diligence becomes the most important
change to make to this bill before it's passed.
Scaled due diligence for every single business,
meaning a duty on every business to act when
exploitation is found, according to the guidance given by the minister.
Scaling up to full due diligence obligations, right down all
operations for the largest businesses and for those whose
supply chains carry higher risks of slavery.
I recognize this places an added cost and burden that businesses will
face when this bill is passed. But leaving off the due diligence
requirement doesn't eliminate the cost,
it moves it.
Who is paying the real cost?
It's vulnerable workers being chronically underpaid,
enduring unsafe conditions, deceived and subjected to
abuse.
This bill will simply ask businesses to take responsibility for what's already
happening in their operations.
The UK and Australia both passed modern slavery legislation that did
not include a requirement to take meaningful action, and both of
their reviews, the UK in 2019 and Australia in '23,
concluded that their laws have not caused
meaningful change.
I would ask the committee to be cautious of any suggestion that we can
pass this bill now and strengthen it later.
Both the UK and Australia accepted the need for stronger laws,
but to this date have not changed their bills to include due diligence or
lower the threshold, as was recommended.
The time to strengthen the bill is now, before it's passed.
Let's follow in the footsteps of France, Norway, the
European Union as a whole,
by prioritizing human rights with scaled requirements on every
business to prevent, act on, and remediate any
cases of slavery.
Exploiting our h- fellow human beings for our own gain
has to end somewhere.
The question is,
how many more people must suffer
before we take the steps needed to start ending it?
Thank you, Chair. I welcome your questions.
Okay, I think we have time for one question,
colleagues. Greg.
Thank you, Gwen. That was superbly presented.
It was very, very compelling. Thank you very much. As was your written submission.
You talk about scaled
requirements. Can you speak to those, what you're imagining in
terms of different size companies and perhaps different industries having
different requirements?
I can't speak to having a detailed knowledge of what would be involved in
every company, unfortunately.
I know, for instance, I am a manager of a very small business, and
even I would have requirements that if I was aware of something that had happened,
I would be expected to act, and it wouldn't be simply a turn a
blind eye because it's convenient.
Right.
Scaling up through businesses that have those higher risks, for instance,
agriculture, cleaning services that may have migrant workers, offshore
manufacturing. As the risks increase, the
obligations would increase-
Mm. Right
...
to be preventing, to be setting up frameworks that created an environment where
slavery couldn't flourish.
Mm.
No, that's really compelling. Again, thank you very, very much.
Thanks for your submission, Gwen. Appreciate it.
Thank you so much.
Okay, we're about to be joined by Billy Moore. You're already with us.
Welcome.
From the Airports Association.
Billy, you've got
10 minutes, and we would love to have a minute or two for questions within that.
Over to you.
Sure. Thank you so much, Committee. Thanks for having me.
Yes, and it was a compelling speaker just before me.
I wouldn't mind riffing off a few of those thoughts myself.
Good discussions and a good platform, I think, for this
bill. It's something that we support the fundamental intent
of at the Airports Association. We cover airports of all sizes
around the country. But I guess we're one of those examples of
where we can think about how this might be applied in practice, and how do we
think about the best way to make a meaningful
impact.
The general theme of our submission was to
think about how sometimes these approaches can
create
a real focus on compliance exercises rather than meaningful engagement
and analysis. And
some of the ideas that we've put forward are designed to try
and lean more towards that meaningful analysis side and avoid
this being kind of a tick box approach.
Mm-hmm.
Airports are quite complicated assets, and even at the
threshold that's been
proposed in this legislation, it could have some quite
challenging impacts for smaller teams, smaller
entities, even if the revenue is quite high.
The themes that we've gotten to include,
is a kind of micro reporting and monitoring
approach
going to be useful compared to the analysis and more of a risk-based
analysis?
How do we get as much alignment with Trans Tasman reporting
as we can? Is there a better approach across there, or can we also
encourage more joint reporting where a sector approach might
allow for more meaningful engagement than individual
entities as well? So I won't go through everything.
I'll just say that we've tried to approach this in the most constructive
way as we can.
Just really hoping that we can improve the bill over time and
see if we can get to the most constructive outcomeThe other part I
think, and I might just, if you don't mind, kind
of riff into some of the things that Gwen Chan just mentioned.
Is there a more risk-based approach here, a way of phasing
engagement, both from entities that have been
monitored and from the government support process as well?
Because I think a really key point is this would capture
airports, a number of airports in New Zealand.
Would it capture some of those entities that we're actually probably more deeply
concerned about?
And are we going to get the ultimate effect with the thresholds that have
been put here, I think is a really important question.
But yeah, happy to get into discussion around any particular aspect that
you've been thinking about,
and that we can potentially provide any more advice on.
Okay. Thanks,
Billie.
Let me jump in with one question. When we're talking about a
mechanism that's primarily focused on supply chain, is
head count a relevant indicator to consider?
Yeah, I think it's a really good question.
I think the challenge is
what are we casting our minds ahead and hoping
the behavior will be around these reporting
entities?
When entities have a reasonably small footprint, as most
airports will in terms of their own core staffing,
it will then need to create
layers and layers of compliance framework for the assurance need to be
provided through all steps of a supply chain.
The bigger that is, the shallower it is really.
And it's a little bit like, I know for those of you who have engaged with this from
the other end, I've had it with, for instance, Australian members
needing to basically do a tick box exercise. Do you have this?
Do you have that?
It's not actually engaging on the issue so much, is it?
It's engaging in do you happen to have a policy on
X? And that's all doable, but it's just
whether will that put something in place so that we have
something that exists, or will it actually work towards an
improvement in working conditions?
That's really the question. You could absolutely do it-
Mm
... it's just whether it would be enough.
Yeah.
Greg, got a question?
Yeah. Thank you very much. This is so helpful.
I really appreciate the technical
detail that you've gone into in your submission.
Just in picking up just one area, in 10A
you say amend Clause 92B to narrow the disclosure of actual
incidences, incidents to quote "material incidents,"
identified and verified through formal due diligence.
So you're
in favor then of due diligence, you're just
arguing for the
scope of what is to be identified and reported on.
You're wanting that narrowed from the current drafting, is that correct?
Yeah. It's just a suggestion to direct energy
towards serious and proactive work, I
suppose.
Yeah.
So you absolutely can continue with,
so for instance the legislation at the moment has every actual incident.
Yeah.
And obviously when we're talking about something this serious, that makes perfect
sense. You want to cover everything.
It's just whether the behavior for the reporting entity
would then actually engage at the depth that you're looking for,
for improvement over time. Particularly when we're talking about
long flung supply chains,
registering or,
again, that kind of shallowness versus depth.
We're suggesting perhaps more of an emphasis on depth of engagement on material
instances and case studies and conditions that are observed
either from one reporting entity or across a whole sector-
Mm
... which might mobilize resourcing and engagement for
better outcomes over time.
And perhaps that might be a better value add from the
legislation.
Yeah.
It's not a being against the micro level-
Mm
... because each incident is important, but more just around how does
legislation affect and promote the behavior we're looking to from major
industry.
Mm.
Just some thoughts really.
No, I really, really appreciate it because one of the constant themes that's come
up in all the submissions, has been, well, not in all of them, but in
a great number of them, is just advising the committee to ensure that the
legislation doesn't just produce something that's primarily about
compliance-
Yeah
... but is actually effectiveness.
And yeah, just as you were speaking, I'm mindful of one board, education institute
that I sit on under the current health and safety,
the
incidents register includes literally when someone has a paper
cut. And as we go through that in board meetings, I'm thinking to
myself that, whichever legislature, legislature was
legis-
legislators were pushing that kind of, that legislation.
I don't imagine that that's what they intended.
So, yeah, I appreciate your caution to us.
Mm.
But one way to think about it when I sit in an association seat
is,
I could imagine a system that ensures that there's
due diligence from each reporting entity, but that also encourages
through a joint reporting mandate or incentive for the
association also to get involved in these issues, look across
systems, international engagement, and that to me, would
produce
quite good outcomes.
Mm.
And so you can see how in the shape of the legislation you might encourage
a track like that, or at least permit a track like that more
strongly, that might lead to a little bit of a better step change that we're
talking about.
Mm.
That might also help apply to maybe some of the things that Gwen's noting
around sector-based,
or riskier sectors as well. So that's why we've kind of flagged
that joint reporting piece as well-
Mm
... because it would bring people like ourselves into the game perhaps a little bit
more effectively.
Mm.
Thank you very much.
Excellent discussion. Thank you, Billie. Appreciate you joining us.
You're most welcome. All the best for the work you have ahead.
Thank you.
All right, members, we are going to make our way over to the
plenary-